ID=G0258
URL=http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/diamond_jubilee/papers/fishman.html
SIZE=31343
DATE=09/07/2002
TIME=16:17:22
DATASET=Astronomy
HTML=<html><head><!-- This document was created from RTF source by rtftohtml version
2.7.5 --></head><body><p>
<title>
Gamma-Ray Bursts: An Overview</title>
<p>
<p>
<p>
<H1>Gamma-Ray Bursts: An Overview</H1><p>
<b></b><p>
<p>
 submitted to: Publ. Astron.Soc. Pac., May 22, 1995
<p>
<p>
<p>
<p>
Dr. Gerald J. Fishman<p>
<i>Space Sciences Laboratory, Code ES-81</i><p>
<i>NASA-Marshall Space Flight Center</i><p>
<i>Huntsville, AL  35812</i><p>
<i>e-mail: fishman@ssl.msfc.nasa.gov</i><p>
<p>
<p>
     ABSTRACT.   A  history and overview of the  observed

     properties  of gamma-ray bursts are presented.   The

     phenomenon of gamma-ray bursts is without precedence

     in astronomy, having no observed property that would

     be  a  direct  indicator of their  distance  and  no

     counterpart  object  in another  wavelength  region.

     Their brief, random appearance only in the gamma-ray

     region has made their study difficult.  The observed

     time profiles, spectral properties and durations  of

     gamma-ray  bursts cover a wide range.  All  proposed

     models   for   their  origin  must   be   considered

     speculative.   It  is humbling to  think  that  even

     after  25  years since their discovery, the distance

     scale  of  gamma-ray  bursts  is  still  very   much

     debatable.

<p>




              1. Introduction and Brief History

<p>


Gamma-ray bursts will be recorded as one of the outstanding

new phenomena discovered in astronomy this century.  The

story is not yet complete; we are only in the middle of it--

as evidenced by this debate.  The general public has yet to

appreciate the significance of gamma-ray bursts.  However,

astronomers worldwide recognize the significance of what is

being observed, even though it is as yet unexplained.  About

once per day, a burst of gamma rays appears from a random

direction on the sky.  Often, this burst outshines all other

sources of gamma-rays in the sky, combined.  It disappears

without a trace, and as yet there is not a conclusive

counterpart in the optical or radio regions or any other

wavelength region.

<p>


Astrophysicists are understandably excited about gamma-ray

bursts.  They are among the most luminous of any object in

the sky in any wavelength region.  They may come from

neutron stars in the most distant reaches of our galaxy or

they may represent an entirely new class of objects near the

edge of the observable Universe.  If the former is true,

then we are seeing a major constituent of the distant parts

of the Galaxy that is presently unobservable by any other

means.  If the latter is true, then gamma-ray bursts could

help us to understand the form and evolution of the Universe

as a whole; they would be a new observational tool for

cosmologists.  We are in a no-lose situation: the resolution

of this debate in the next few years would result in a major

breakthrough for astronomy as we come to the close to the

twentieth century.

<p>


Seventy-five years ago, almost to the very day, in the Baird

Auditorium, a debate ensued on the nature of the then-

mysterious spiral nebulae and on the distance scale of the

Universe.  As Professor Trimble noted, the eventual

resolution of that debate changed forever the way in which

we see our place in the Galaxy and the Universe.  An

understanding of the gamma-ray burst distance scale could

well have similar results.


<p>

This history of gamma-ray bursts is tied closely to that of

the space program and to the cold-war activities of the

1960's.  In order to observe gamma-rays from distant objects

in space, detectors needed to be placed on platforms above

the Earth's atmosphere.  The space age opened up high-energy

astronomy in the late 1960's.  When this new window on the

Universe opened, entirely new types of objects were found

and new properties of familiar objects in astronomy were

also discovered.

<p>


At about the same time, the Cold War was near its peak.  The

U.S. Defense Department became worried that the Soviet Union

or Red China could explode nuclear weapons in space, hidden

from other countries, in violation of the test-ban treaty.

The response by the U.S. was to deploy a large variety of

sensors on multiple spacecraft in earth orbit to detect

clandestine nuclear explosions above the atmosphere.  The

Vela series of spacecraft were developed by the Los Alamos

National Laboratory to perform this function.  I was told

that the orbits of the spacecraft were greatly elongated in

order to simultaneously seen a large fraction of the earth

and also to look behind the moon for hidden explosions!

<p>


Of course, clandestine nuclear explosions were not found,

but occasional bursts of gamma-rays were seen coming from

random directions in space.  Later, it was determined that

nearly coincident bursts were detected by multiple

spacecraft.  The timing of these bursts at widely separated

spacecraft were consistent with that expected from sources

far from the earth and they could not be associated with the

sun or any other part of the solar system.  These first

observations of gamma-ray bursts were not classified, but

they required extensive data reduction and analysis with

limited resources before the researchers, headed by Ray

Klebesadel of Los Alamos, were confident that the bursts

being observed were of cosmic origin.  The paper announcing

the discovery of  gamma-ray bursts was published in The

Astrophysical Journal in 1973 (Klebesadel, Strong and Olsen,

1973).  In the first years after their discovery, gamma-ray

bursts were observed at the rate of from 10 to 20 per year.

Now, with more complete coverage and larger detectors, gamma-

ray bursts are detected at the rate of over 300 per year.

<p>


Over two thousand observational and theoretical papers have

been written about gamma-ray bursts in the past 25 years

(Hurley 1994), yet they remain perhaps the least understood

of all objects that have been observed in the Universe.

Described in the following sections are some of the observed

properties of gamma-ray bursts, obtained primarily by the

BATSE experiment on NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory.

Two comprehensive gamma-ray burst catalogs from the BATSE

experiment on the Compton Observatory have been released

(Fishman et al 1994, Meegan et al 1994) and a third catalog

is expected to be released in the summer of 1995.  That

experiment has been in operation since April 1991 and it is

planned to continue operating at least until 2001.   Some of

these observations are controversial and subject to

differing interpretations.  Unfortunately, space does not

permit a detailed description of these analyses,

interpretations and controversies in this paper; some of

them will become evident during the debate.

<p>


The field of gamma-ray bursts has undergone a rapid,

dramatic, and to many, a surprising change over the past

three years.  This has resulted primarily from more

sensitive observations of the gamma-ray burst intensity and

sky distributions (Meegan et al 1992).  Prior to these

observations, the source of gamma-ray bursts were considered

by most workers in the field to be relatively nearby neutron

stars in the Galactic plane (cf. Higdon & Lingenfelder

1990).


<p>



          2. Temporal and Spectral Characteristics


<p>

Perhaps the most striking feature of the time profiles of

gamma-ray bursts is the diversity of their time structures

and the wide range of their durations.  Coupled with this

diversity is the inability to place many gamma-ray bursts

into well-defined types, based on their time profiles.  This

difficult task is hampered by bursts with multiple

characteristics, bursts that are too weak to classify, and a

lack of a priori knowledge of the number of classes and sub-

classes to employ in the classification scheme.

<p>


Some burst profiles are chaotic and spiky with large

fluctuations on all time scales (Fig. 1), while others show

rather simple structures with few peaks (Fig. 2).  However,

some bursts are seen with both characteristics present

within the same burst.  No  persistent, strictly periodic

structures have been seen from gamma-ray bursts.  At higher

energies, the overall burst durations are shorter and sub-

pulses within a burst tend to have shorter rise-times and

fall-times (sharper spikes).  Most bursts also show an

asymmetry, with the leading edges of shorter duration than

trailing edges. This applies to both the overall burst as

well as to sub-structures within a burst.

<p>


The durations of gamma-ray bursts range from about 30ms to

over 1000s.  However, the duration of a gamma-ray burst,

like the burst morphology, is difficult to quantify since it

is dependent upon the sensitivity and the time resolution of

the experiment.  The "tip of the iceberg" effect tends to

cause weaker bursts to be observed as shorter, since only

the higher parts of the peak emission are observable.   A

recent observation of delayed high-energy gamma-ray emission

from a gamma-ray burst was reported in 1994.  The EGRET

experiment on the Compton Observatory detected very high

energy (200 MeV - 20 GeV) photons from an intense burst on

17 February 1994 (Hurley et al 1994).  At the lower photon

energies, characteristic of that observable by the BATSE and

Ulysses detectors, this gamma-ray burst lasted 180 s.

Following this emission there were additional photons, with

energies up to 20 GeV, as long as 5700 s after the start of

the burst.

<p>


A unique feature of gamma-ray bursts is their high-energy

emission: almost all of the power is emitted above 50 keV.

Most bursts have a rather simple continuum spectrum which

appears somewhat similar in shape when integrated over the

entire burst and when sampled on various time scales within

a burst.  An integrated spectrum from the strong burst GRB

910503, using data from all four GRO experiments is shown in

Figure 4 (Schaefer et al 1994).


<p>



             3. Intensity and Sky Distributions


<p>

The most direct evidence of the spatial distribution of the

sources of gamma-ray bursts comes from the observed

intensity and sky distributions.  The angular (sky)

distribution provides two of the dimensions of the spatial

distribution, while the intensity distribution is a

convolution of the unknown luminosity function and the

radial distribution.  Even though the luminosity function is

unknown, the intensity distribution can still provide

constraints on the allowable spatial distributions of gamma-

ray burst sources.


<p>

If the sources are distributed homogeneously in Euclidean

space, i.e. the density and luminosity function are

independent of position throughout the volume of space

observed, then the integral intensity distribution will be

N(>P) = P-3/2.  From Figure 4, a significant deviation of

the observed intensity distribution from this -3/2 power law

(shown as a dashed line) is evident.  This clearly indicates

an inhomogeneity in the region of space being sampled.

Further insight into the brightness distribution was

provided by Fenimore et al (1993), who combined data from

BATSE and the Pioneer Venus Orbiter (PVO) burst experiments.

Though less sensitive than BATSE, PVO operated for 10 years,

yielding data on the rarer, more intense bursts.  The higher

intensities observed by PVO are seen to be consistent with

homogeneity,  and the agreement between the experiments in

the overlap region is excellent.


<p>

Since the launch of the Compton Observatory, burst locations

have been available for a large sample of weak bursts.

BATSE determines directions to burst sources by comparing

the count rates on individual detectors, whose response

varies approximately as the cosine of the angle to the

detector normal.  The systematic error of these locations is

presently about 4 deg., as determined by using hard solar

flares and bursts with locations known via interplanetary

timing.  Improved BATSE locations, in the range 1.5 deg. for

strong bursts, are now attainable and older data are being

re-processed.  The statistical error is around 13 degrees

near the BATSE threshold.


<p>

The distribution in galactic coordinates of 1121 bursts

observed by BATSE is shown in Figure 5.  The BATSE results

(Briggs et al 1995) show that this distribution is

consistent with isotropy, in a statistical sense, and that

this isotropy extends to the weakest bursts, those that lie

below the break from the -3/2 slope in the intensity

distribution.  It is interesting to note that observations

of weak bursts far from the Galactic plane had been noted

prior to the BATSE results, but from a very limited number

of bursts (Wilson et al 1982; Hurley 1992).  In all galactic

disk models, a deviation in slope below -3/2 is necessarily

accompanied by a strong concentration of sources in the

galactic plane.



<p>






             4. Searches for Burst Counterparts


<p>

Ever since the initial discovery of gamma-ray bursts, there

has been a quest to discover a counterpart to a gamma-ray

burst in any other wavelength region before, during, or

after the gamma-ray event.  These searches have concentrated

on the optical region, although virtually all

electromagnetic wavelength regions, and other, more esoteric

radiations, have been searched.


<p>

The searches for counterparts have taken many forms,

including searches for statistical associations of known

objects with bursts with poorly known locations as well as

searches of archival plates and other data bases for

transient or unusual objects within the error boxes of well-

determined burst locations.  Attempts have also been made to

obtain a chance observation of a counterpart with wide-field

patrol cameras.  These attempts have not yet proven to be

unambiguously successful.  There have been several claims of

candidate objects as counterparts, but these have generally

been discounted because of low statistical significance,

controversial instrumental effects or the spurious, one-time

occurrence of a claimed counterpart which could not be

independently confirmed by a second instrument.   A recent

review of the present status of correlated gamma-ray burst

observations in all wavelength regions is given by Schaefer

(1994).


<p>

The pioneering efforts of K. Hurley, T. Cline and others to

establish and operate an interplanetary network (IPN) of

spacecraft to precisely locate gamma-ray bursts began in the

late 1970's and continue today.  These locations for gamma-

ray bursts are the best that are available.  Their accuracy,

and the response time in providing them, have been

continuously improving over the years.  Currently, the

Ulysses spacecraft and near-earth detectors serve as the

only two interplanetary baseline nodes.  This unfortunate

circumstance will persist until the Russian Mars '96

spacecraft becomes part of the network.   Typical IPN

location accuracies are in range of 1 to 10 arc-minutes.  In

the past, with a network of three or more spacecraft, error

boxes of 10 square arc-minutes were not uncommon.  The large

diameter, narrow width error annuli derived from the two

spacecraft Ulysses-Earth network observations can be used

with coarser locations from single experiment location

determinations to greatly restrict the error boxes of many

bursts.  A moderately strong gamma-ray burst is required for

observation by the relatively small detectors of  the IPN

spacecraft.   The HETE spacecraft, to be launched in 1995

(Section 7) will become the first gamma-ray burst experiment

to provide accurate (~0.1 degree) single-spacecraft

locations over a wide field-of-view (Ricker et al 1992).

<p>


BATSE has had a quick alert capability since 1991 that was

developed to provide burst locations within several hours,

under favorable conditions.  A joint BATSE-COMPTEL

capability also exists that is able to provide even more

accurate (~1 deg) locations within several hours for those

gamma-ray bursts which also happen to be within the COMPTEL

field-of-view (about 10 percent of the sky).  A new, near-

real-time burst location system utilizing BATSE data, called

BACODINE (BAtse COordinates DIstribution NEtwork) (Barthelmy

et al 1994), is also underway. The BATSE-BACODINE system can

provide gamma-ray burst locations to external sites within

about 5 seconds of their detection by BATSE.  When BACODINE

is linked to a rapid-slewing optical telescope, it opens the

exciting possibility of obtaining optical images of burst

regions while the burst is in progress.



<p>


   5. Controversies Regarding Gamma-Ray Burst Observations


<p>

The reported observation of spectral line features in gamma-

ray bursts, and their interpretation as cyclotron lines

produced in the intense magnetic fields of neutron stars

(cf. Harding 1991) has been a primary reason for associating

gamma-ray bursts with neutron stars.  A search for line

features (either absorption or emission features) with the

detectors of BATSE-Compton Observatory has thus far been

unable to confirm the earlier reports of spectral line

features from gamma-ray bursts.


<p>

The question of burst repetition remains controversial.

Models of nearest neighbor clustering using BATSE data have

concluded that burst repetition, if present, accounts for

less than about 20% of the observed bursts (Strohmeyer,

Fenimore & Miralles 1994; Meegan et al 1995).


<p>

Renewed interest in cosmological models of gamma-ray bursts

has led to a search for a more direct means of determining

their distance scale.  In particular, considerable attention

has been placed on the observation of time dilation effects

in gamma-ray bursts.  Because of their finite, relatively

short duration, gamma-ray bursts at cosmological distances

would exhibit time dilation effects unobservable from other

astronomical objects.  In accordance with standard

cosmology, the more distant bursts are fainter and they are

receding faster.  Thus they would show a larger time

dilation than the nearer, more intense bursts.  The entire

burst would be "stretched" so that the fainter bursts (and

presumably farther) would be, on the average, longer.  In

addition, individual pulse structures within bursts and the

time intervals between these pulse structures would be

similarly stretched.  Finally, the spectra of the fainter,

more distant bursts would be redshifted, which, in essence,

is a time dilation of the wavelength of emission in the

observer's frame.


<p>

Due to the complexity of the gamma-ray burst time structures

and the wide range of their durations, any dilation effects

can only be tested in a statistical sense.  Initial work in

these efforts and a positive result was announced by a group

at NASA/Goddard, using BATSE data (Norris et al. 1994).

Other workers have not confirmed this result and it remains

somewhat controversial.  If the result is confirmed, it

would be consistent with a cosmological origin, but not a

proof, since other effects could conceivably cause an

intensity-duration correlation.


<p>



                6. Models of Gamma-Ray Bursts


<p>

A theoretical understanding of gamma-ray bursts will

comprise several components: a site, an energy source, and

an emission mechanism.  The sites must be consistent with

the observed isotropy and inhomogeneity, the energy source

must be sufficient to produce the observed intensities for

the distances assumed, and the emission mechanism must be

able to reproduce the time scales and the spectra observed

in bursts.  Satisfying even these minimal observational

prerequisites has proved difficult.

<p>


While there have been over a hundred theoretical papers

proposing a wide range of scenarios for gamma-ray bursts

(Nemiroff 1994), none provide a complete theory.  That is,

none have provided complete details specifying the site, the

energy source, and an analysis of the energy emission

processes.  The final step, deriving the observed burst

properties from considerations of the energy transport, has

been the most difficult.  The paucity of X-rays, for

example, presents difficulties for processes occurring near

the surface of a neutron star.  The intense gamma radiation

would be expected to heat the neutron star surface,

producing an intense thermal X-ray component, which has not

been observed.



<p>






                   7. Future Observations


<p>

Two spacecraft containing gamma-ray burst instruments will

soon be producing new gamma-ray burst observations.  The

TGRS (Transient Gamma-Ray Spectrometer) is an experiment on

the US WIND spacecraft launched in 1994.  The detector is a

high-resolution, passively-cooled germanium detector.  The

WIND spacecraft also contains two Konus detectors which are

similar to the spectroscopy detectors of BATSE.


<p>

The HETE (High Energy Transient Explorer) satellite is a

small satellite mission dedicated to the study of gamma-ray

burst.  The prime objective is the precise localization and

rapid follow-up observation of gamma-ray burst locations by

on-board UV detectors and observatories on the ground.

Burst localization to 0.1 degree can be achieved by the x-

ray detectors and to 3 arc-sec by the CCD, if there is

concurrent, detectable UV emission.  Data can be forwarded

in near real-time to a large number of primary and secondary

receiving sites for rapid follow-up observations.  HETE is

scheduled for launch in late 1995.


<p>

The last successful interplanetary probe launched with a

gamma-ray burst detector was Ulysses in 1990.  The Russian

Mars-96 spacecraft will carry several detectors for gamma-

ray burst observations.  It will become an important

component of the Interplanetary Network (IPN) of gamma-ray

burst detectors.  G. Ricker/MIT (priv. comm.) also proposes

an array of miniature spacecraft with accurate timing

capability, spaced around the Earth's orbit to establish a

significant enhancement to the IPN.



<p>
Plans are being made for new, powerful ground-based optical

CCD camera systems for burst counterpart searches.  These

rapidly slewing camera systems, when coupled to  BATSE-

BACODINE or to other near realtime burst-locating spacecraft

such as HETE will provide unprecedented sensitivity in the

magnitude range 15-17.  A successor to the GROCSE camera

system (Akerlof et al 1994) is being planned.  Similarly, a

very sensitive, dedicated wide-field rapid response camera

for burst studies is being proposed by a European consortium

as part of the European Southern Observatory (M. Boer, priv.

comm.).


<p>

The hypothesis of an extended halo of gamma-ray burst

sources surrounding the Galaxy can be tested by the

observation of a similar population around other nearby

galaxies, notably M31.   A sufficiently sensitive future

detector system (~10x BATSE sensitivity) pointed toward the

M31 may be able to detect the faint gamma-ray bursts that

might be emanating from the M31 halo.  Such a sensitivity

may be attainable by a combination of large detector area,

background reduction and collimation of the field.  Such

detector systems are currently under study (F. Harrison, C.

Meegan, priv. comms.).


<p>



                8. The Essence of the Debate


<p>

In the past few years, gamma-ray burst research has switched

from a field with sparse data and detailed theoretical

models to one of much data and models with little or no

detail.  The consensus opinion of the e locale of the

sources of gamma-ray bursts has changed from a fraction of a

galactic scale height to either an extended galactic halo or

to cosmological distances.  The gamma-ray burst enigma

appears to be as great now as it was twenty years ago

(Ruderman 1975).  A wealth of new data on time profiles,

spectral characteristics and burst distributions has thus

far failed to provided conclusive evidence on the distance

scale, central object(s) or emission mechanism(s) for the

classical gamma-ray bursts.  The isotropy and inhomogeneity

of the bursts shows only that we are at or near the center

of the apparent burst distribution.

<p>


For the galactic halo models, the apparent isotropy of

observed bursts requires that the distribution radius be

significantly greater than the distance between Earth and

the Galactic Center, and it also limits the amount of the

central condensation (core) of an extended halo (Hakkila et

al 1994).  On the other hand, the failure to observe an

excess of bursts from M31 places upper limits on the extent

of this halo.  The conclusion is that extended halo models

require typical distances to sources of order 100 kpc,

regardless of the details of the radial distribution.  At

these distances, the required source luminosity is of order

1042 ergs/s (for isotropic emission).

<p>


The observed isotropy is a necessary requirement of

cosmological models.  The apparent inhomogeneity would

result from redshift effects, and possibly source evolution.

Satisfactory fits can be found using standard candle

luminosities, standard cosmologies, and no source evolution.

The weakest bursts originate from sources that are at

redshifts of about z~1 to 2 and the luminosity is of order

1050 to 1052 ergs/s, assuming isotropic emission.


<p>

These two, greatly divergent distance scales for gamma-ray

bursts- the galactic halo distances and cosmological

distances, have become the subject of the second "Great

Debate" in astronomy, which now follows.



<p>


Acknowledgments


<p>

The author is grateful to Robert Nemiroff and the other

organizers of the Great Debate II.  Members of the BATSE

team in Huntsville contributed significantly to the material

used in this paper.


<p>

Note: Some sections of this paper were derived from a review

article on gamma-ray bursts for the Annual Reviews of

Astronomy and Astrophysics, Vol. 33 (Fishman and Meegan

1995) that is now in press.  A more comprehensive set of

references than those given here may be found in that paper.



<p>


                         REFERENCES


<p>

Akerlof, C., Fatuzzo, M., Lee, B., Bionta, R., Ledebuhr, A.,

     et al. 1994, in AIP Conf. Proc. 307, Fishman, G.,

     Brainerd, J., Hurley, K., eds.(New York, AIP Press),

     633
<p>

Barthelmy, S., Cline, T., Gehrels, N., Bialas, T., et al.

     1994, in AIP Conf. Proc. 307, Fishman, G., Brainerd,

     J., Hurley, K., eds.(New York, AIP Press), 643

<p>
Briggs, M.S. et al. 1995. ApJ, submitted

Fenimore, E., Epstein, R., Ho, C., Klebesadel, R., et al.

     1993,  Nature, 366, 40

<p>
Fishman, G., Brainerd, J., Hurley, K., eds., 1994, Proc.

     Gamma-Ray Burst Workshop, Huntsville, AL, AIP Conf.

     Proc. 307 (New York, AIP Press)

<p>
Fishman, G., Meegan, C., Wilson, R., Brock, M., Horack, J.,

     et al. 1994,  ApJ Supp, 92, 229

<p>
Fishman, G. and Meegan, C. 1995, Ann. Rev. Astron.

     Astrophys., 33, in press

<p>
Hakkila, J., Meegan, C., Pendleton, G., Fishman, G., Wilson,

     R., et al. 1994,  ApJ, 422, 659

<p>
Harding, A.K. 1991, Phys. Reports, 206, 327

<p>
Higdon, J., Lingenfelter, R. 1990,  Ann. Rev. Astron.

     Astrophys. 28, 401

<p>
Hurley K. 1992, in Gamma Ray Bursts, Ho, C., Epstein, R.,

     Fenimore, E., eds. (Cambridge, Cambridge University

     Press), 183

<p>
Hurley, K., 1994, in AIP Conf. Proc. 307, Fishman, G.,

     Brainerd, J., Hurley, K., eds.(New York, AIP Press),

     726

<p>
Hurley, K., Dingus, B., Mukherjee, R., Kouveliotou, C.,

     Meegan, C., et al. 1994,  Nature,  372, 652

<p>
Klebesadel, R.,  Strong, I., and Olsen, R. 1973, ApJ, 182,

     L85

<p>
Meegan, C., Fishman, G., Wilson, R., Paciesas, W.,

     Pendleton, G., et al. 1992, Nature, 355, 143

<p>
Meegan, C., et al. 1994,  The Second BATSE Gamma-Ray Burst

     Catalog (electronic form) avail. GROSSC:NASA/GSFC

<p>
Meegan, C., Hartmann, D., Brainerd, J., Briggs, M.,

     Paciesas, W., et al. 1995. ApJ, in press

<p>
Nemiroff, R.J. 1994, Comm. in Astrophys. 17,189

<p>
Norris, J.P., Nemiroff, R.J., Scargle, J.D., Kouveliotou,

     C., Fishman, G.J., et al. 1994, ApJ 424, 540
<p>

Ricker, G., Doty, J., Rappaport, S., Vanderspek, R.,

     Matsuoka, M., et al. 1992, in Gamma Ray Bursts, Ho, C.,

     Epstein, R., Fenimore, E., eds. (Cambridge, Cambridge

     University Press), 288
<p>

Ruderman M. 1975,  Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 262, 164

<p>
Schaefer, B., Teegarden, B., Cline, T., Dingus, B., Fishman,

     G., et al. 1994, in AIP Conf. Proc. 307, Fishman, G.,

     Brainerd, J., Hurley, K., eds.(New York, AIP Press),

     280

<p>
Schaefer B. 1994, in AIP Conf. Proc. 307, Fishman G.,

     Brainerd J., Hurley, K., eds.(New York, AIP Press), 382
<p>

Strohmeyer, T.E., Fenimore, E.E.,  Miralles, J.A. 1994, ApJ,

     432, 665

<p>
Wilson, R., Fishman, G., Meegan, C. 1982, in Gamma-ray

     Transients and Related Astrophysical Phenomena,

     Lingenfelter, R., Hudson, H., Worrall, D., eds. AIP

     Conf. Proc. No. 77, p.67, (New York,AIP Press)










<p>

Figure Captions


<p>

      Figure 1.  Examples of several gamma-ray bursts,

          showing very chaotic temporal structures.

      
<p>

      Figure 2.  Some gamma-ray bursts, such as these, have

          very little structure in their time profiles

      
<p>

      Figure 3.  Example of the very broad, smooth spectrum

          of a gamma-ray bursts over four decades in energy,

          obtained by the experiments of the Compton Gamma

          Ray Observatory.

      
<p>

      Figure 4.  The intensity distribution of gamma-ray

          bursts, showing the clear deviation from the -3/2

          power-law expected if the gamma-ray bursts were

          homogeneously distributed in Euclidean space.

      
<p>

      Figure 5.  The sky distribution of 1121 gamma-ray

          bursts, from the BATSE experiment on the Compton

          Gamma Ray Observatory.




<p>

